{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\f0\fs32 Development Logbook: Advanced Web Design & Development\par
\b0\fs22\par
\b Course:\b0  BIT3208\par
\b Project:\b0  Student Portal & Management System\par
\par
\b\fs28 Week 6: Database Integration and CRUD Operations\par
\b0\fs22\par
\b Overview\b0\par
This week focused on connecting our web application to a MySQL database to securely store, retrieve, update, and delete records.\par
\par
\b Activities & Implementation\b0\par
1. Database Connection & Initialization (db.php, index.php)\par
- Configured the MySQL connection parameters (localhost, root, studentportal).\par
- Implemented an automated setup script in index.php that dynamically creates the database and the necessary tables (users, students, units, student_units) if they do not exist.\par
2. Create (C) - Adding Records (add_student.php)\par
- Built a secure HTML form to capture student details (Full Name, Email, Course).\par
- Used PHP to sanitize inputs and executed an INSERT INTO SQL query to save records.\par
3. Read (R) - Displaying Records (view_students.php)\par
- Executed a SELECT * FROM students query.\par
- Dynamically generated an HTML table using a while loop with mysqli_fetch_assoc() to display all registered students.\par
4. Update (U) - Editing Records (edit_student.php)\par
- Allowed users to click "Edit" on a specific record, passing the student's ID via the URL (GET request).\par
- Pre-filled a form with the existing data and utilized an UPDATE SQL statement to apply modifications.\par
5. Delete (D) - Removing Records (delete_student.php)\par
- Created a backend script that takes a student ID and runs a DELETE FROM students WHERE id = ? query to remove the record permanently.\par
\par
\b\fs28 Week 7: User Authentication and Session Management\par
\b0\fs22\par
\b Overview\b0\par
This week focused on securing the application. We implemented a comprehensive Multi-User Authentication System supporting Admin, Lecturer, and Student roles with strict access controls.\par
\par
\b Activities & Implementation\b0\par
1. Secure User Registration (register.php)\par
- Created a registration form allowing users to select their specific role (Admin, Lecturer, or Student).\par
- Security Practice: Implemented password_hash() with PASSWORD_DEFAULT to ensure passwords are encrypted before being stored.\par
2. Login System (login.php)\par
- Built an authentication script that searches for a user's email.\par
- Utilized password_verify() to cross-check the submitted plain-text password against the hashed password in the database.\par
3. Session Management (session_start())\par
- Upon successful login, the system securely stores the user's user_id, fullname, and role inside the $_SESSION superglobal to remember them across pages.\par
4. Protected Pages & Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)\par
- Dashboard Segregation (dashboard.php): Conditionally rendered UI elements. Students see "Available Units" and "My Registered Units", while Admins/Lecturers see "Manage Students" and "Manage Units".\par
- Backend Lockdown: Added strict session checks at the top of pages like add_student.php and delete_student.php to forcibly redirect any unauthorized users.\par
5. Logout Functionality (logout.php)\par
- Created a secure exit point that uses session_unset() and session_destroy() to wipe the temporary user data and redirect back to the login screen.\par
6. Advanced Feature Implementation: Unit Registration\par
- Applied week 6 & 7 knowledge to build a relational Unit Registration system (available_units.php and my_units.php) specifically tailored for the Student role.\par
\par
\b Weekly Reflection Summary\b0\par
Through Weeks 6 and 7, the application evolved from a static interface into a highly dynamic, data-driven, and secure system. We successfully applied CRUD operations to manage records, and leveraged password hashing and sessions to ensure that sensitive operations remain exclusively in the hands of authorized administrators and lecturers.\par
}
